In January 1919 and for all of 1919, Prime Minister David Lloyd George had a considerable
amount of information going across his desk. Information not seen by the general public.
Generally I suspect known by the press, but the British Empire was one of his many concerns.
And this is just a brief summary of some of the major things that were happening and he would
have become aware of. In January 21st 1919, the Sinn Fein members who'd been elected in the 1918
general election and who had said they would not take up their seats in the House of Commons in
Parliament chose to declare an independent Irish Republic. And so for the first time,
Dale Aaron met in Mansion House Dublin. At the same day the Anglo-Irish War started,
two Royal Irish constabulary men were killed in an ambush at Solo Head Beg in Tipperary.
Later that same year, Eamon de Valera, the leader of Escape from Lincoln Prison,
in South Africa, 70,000 mainly black African miners went on strike at the Witch What's Around.
Their strike was disciplined and organised and the government threw police cordons around their
compounds. The troops broke through the workers barricades with bayonets fixed, killing three and
wounding 40. Later police and armed white civilians attacked a meeting of solidarity with a strike in
miners killing 80 and wounding 80. Meanwhile in Cape Town, the first South African Indian
conference was convened and the Indians there resolved to agitate for full civil rights and
to resort to civil resistance until those rights were granted. Meanwhile on the 13th of April 1919
in Punjab, the Jallanwala Bagh massacre, also known as the Amritsar massacre, occurred.
Civilians, unarmed civilians I should say, had assembled for a peaceful protest to condemn the
arrest and deportation of two national leaders, Satyapal and Safuddin Kichlu, and also to honour
the Sikh festival of Basarqi. Acting Brigadier General Reginald Dyer, with his battalion of
Indian Army and Gurkha troops, fired rifles into the crowd of unarmed Indian civilians.
They were to kill between 300 and a thousand and a thousand were wounded, 14 of which were children.
But this is the power of the press because when Dyer returned to England, the press demanded a
public collection for, as Rudyard Kipling described him, the hero of India and he received 26,000
pounds, nearly a million pounds in modern terms. China was the largest non-European
participant in World War I. It fought with the Allies and most people don't know that because
so much of 1919 is secret history. China joined the war because Germany at the siege of Singtao
in 1914 had captured Shandong, the birthplace of Confucius. China was not allowed to become
a combatant because Japan objected. So instead they sent thousands of volunteers who repaired
tanks, dug trenches, carried munitions at the front line. But when China turned up at the Versailles
treaty signing, they were told Shandong was being given to Japan. The delegation returned
to Beijing and the first student protests occurred on the 4th of May 1919. That May the 4th movement,
an anti-imperialist cultural and political movement, was the beginning, it has been argued,
of communism as a cultural shift in China. Meanwhile across the Caribbean,
the war had resulted in longer working hours, no increase in wages, higher prices of goods and poverty.
The returning soldiers and merchant seamen, many of which had been forcefully repatriated
after serving in World War I, were angry and disillusioned. This was a critical time in the
rising demand for independence and the creation of the first trade unions and the first political
parties. In Canada, June the 21st 1919, Royal Northwest Mounted Police fired a volley of bullets
into a crowd of unemployed war veterans, killing two in what was known as the Bloody Saturday
of the Winnipeg General Strike. David Lord George saw a continuing picture of a collapsing empire.
Egypt Civil War by 1922. Egypt was a freed country. Afghanistan Civil War.
Ceylon. Australia where returning soldiers attacked people they saw as communists.
And there was much more. And across the empire there was revolt and demonstrations.
And across the empire, new legislations and increasing level of extreme violence
by the state or with the agreement of Downing Street. So what David Lloyd George saw
was a collapse of the British Empire and the fact that those in the empire were not going to return
to the previous world where London decided everything and money decided everything.
And his fear was a shift towards socialism but even bigger a shift towards Bolshevism.